User/ekarabulut/ocp lock update (#994)
chipsalliance/caliptra-rtl: docs/CaliptraHardwareSpecification.md

* AXI Manager DMA AES feature for OCP L.O.C.K. support (refer to [DMA Specification](https://github.com/chipsalliance/caliptra-ss/blob/main/docs/CaliptraSSHardwareSpecification.md#caliptra-core-axi-manager--dma-assist))
* [AES Big Endian mode](#aes-endian)
* [External Staging Area](./CaliptraIntegrationSpecification.md#external-staging-area)

> * [OCP LOCK Support](#ocp-lock-hardware-architecture)

Reviewer: ML-KEM
SHA3

* 4B scratchpad registers that are lockable but cleared on warm reset (10 registers)
* 4B scratchpad registers that are cleared on warm reset (8 registers)

## OCP LOCK Hardware Architecture

### 1.1 Overview

> Changes are made to support OCP LOCK flows defined for SSD applications. Specification is published here:   

Reviewer: addressed by Emre's recent updates

[OCP L.O.C.K. Specification](https://chipsalliance.github.io/Caliptra/ocp-lock/specification/HEAD)

### 3 HW config register bit and macro

> **`ss_ocp_lock_en`** constant-value input strap, with a bit in **CPTRA_HW_CONFIG** register, called `OCP_LOCK_MODE_en`:

Reviewer: Should be documented with all the other input ports/straps to caliptra-core, in integration spec.

* 4B scratchpad registers that are lockable but cleared on warm reset (10 registers)
* 4B scratchpad registers that are cleared on warm reset (8 registers)

## OCP LOCK Hardware Architecture

### 1.1 Overview
Changes are made to support OCP LOCK flows defined for SSD applications. Specification is published here:   
[OCP L.O.C.K. Specification](https://chipsalliance.github.io/Caliptra/ocp-lock/specification/HEAD)

### 3 HW config register bit and macro
**CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_EN** constant-value input strap, with a bit in **CPTRA_HW_CONFIG** register:
- Enables HEK DOE

> - Enables CALIPTRA_IN_OCP_LOCK to be set

Reviewer 2: Real register name is SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS

**CLP_DV_REG_NONSTICKYGENERICSCRATCHREG_0**: The least significant bit (LSB) of this register indicates whether the HEK seed is in permanent mode, meaning all HEK seeds have been used and no valid HEK seed remains.

**NOTE:** CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_EN is strap pin and needs to be driven  with a constant value by the integrator. 

### 4 HW “mode” register bit
**CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_PROGRESS_REG**
- KeyVault slots 0-15: Standard use-cases
- KeyVault slots 16-23: Standard use-cases
- Write-1-to-lock
- ROM must set this after performing LOCK derivations (HEK, EPK, etc)
- CALITPRA_OCP_LOCK_EN + CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM macro is the write-enable for this bit
- Prevents interactions between slots (STANDARD slots) and (LOCK slots)

> - Enables Key Release operation

Reviewer 2: Also enables AES write to KV.

### 5.3 Add AES Write Path
Decrypted Keys (or “unwrapped”/ “ready” keys, e.g. MPK) may be written to KV slots.  
**MEK** must be written to KV slot 23. Enforced in HW by detecting AES-ECB decrypt operation with KvSlots16 (MDK) as key.

### 5.7 Add KeyVault access rules and filtering logic
- ROM is responsible for choosing dest slot for HEK seed

> - INSTEAD, Slot 23 PREVENTED as destination for all DOE operations

Reviewer 2: Might want to mention these new rules only take effect when OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS is set.

Reviewer: Also the all-caps is not needed.

Reviewer 2: @ekarabu  - Why do you have "INSTEAD" here? I think this should read "All DOE operations prevented from writing to slot 23"

  - Slot 23 (place for MEK) restricted so ONLY AES can write to it (when OCP LOCK in progress)
  - Slot 22 also used to store full derived HEK, which overwrites HEK seed (ROM requirement)

>   - Locked for writes until warm reset (ROM requirement, must lock after each reset)

Reviewer 2: What is locked for writes until warm reset?

Author: @calebofearth?

Reviewer: We need a separate section to document integrator/Firmware requirements for OCP LOCK HW changes - probably in the integration spec.
There, we should mention that ROM must lock HEK slot for writes, set OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS, etc. 
I think Runtime should lock EPK/DPK, but not MEK (since it will be re-derived), but we can leave that to them.

>   - Locked for copying until warm reset (ROM requirement, must lock after each reset)

Reviewer 2: Same question as above.

> - There must not be a way from KV0-16 to KV10-15 or from KV10-15 to KV9-0 if OCP parameter and OCP_LOCK_PROGRESS_REG, which is set only by ROM, are high.

Reviewer 2: KV numbers wrong. Also register is slightly wrong name. You can probably exclude "OCP parameter" since OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS set means OCP parameter is set.

> - IF (OCP LOCK mode enabled) THEN (KV23 shall never be used as input to other crypto operations, only as source for Key Release). Prevents known values propagating to other KV slots.

Reviewer 2: Similar comment to above, it might be nice to have a parent bullet saying rules enabled when OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS set. And then child bullets. That way it is very obvious what relies on that register.

Reviewer 2: Still needs addressing. I don't think (OCP LOCK mode enabled) needed since we have the parent bullet.

Reviewer: Addressed this with feedback/commits

- IF (OCP LOCK mode enabled) AND (AES-ECB decrypt operation) AND (key = KV16) THEN (dest = KV23)  
  ELSE (dest=FW) << Preventing AES writes to other KV slots is important to avoid malicious firmware getting known values into KV.

**KeyVault gains intelligence:**

> - Track which crypto made most recent read request.

Reviewer 2: Is this true?

Reviewer: Instead of implementing this, the KV filtering rules were added at each crypto block KV client

- On Write, compute if the write destination is legal for the read.
- RULE: No cryptos with KV access operate in parallel. KV won’t track this, but caliptra_top enforces via HW_ERROR

### HEK seed fuse register
Used as input to HEK seed deobfuscation operation

### 7 HEK Seed Deobfuscation
Hardware path from Ratchet Fuse Register (Obf HEK Seed) as input to DOE (with OBF_KEY), with output stored to KV slot 9.
- Slot 9 is locked for write on DOE operation.
- Slot 9 is locked for use immediately after being used to derive HEK (which is placed into a slot 10-14).

### 8 Input Straps for MEK address and size
Writable until FUSE_WR_DONE, then locked, same as other straps.  
Input addr strap is full address to MEK – FW can derive SFR_BASE from this strap as needed.
Input size strap indicates byte-count (dword-count preferred by HW) of MEK to program to MEK address.

### 9 Key Release

> Hardware path allowing KV slot 15 to be written to SoC using DMA block.

Reviewer 2: KV23 not 15.

> - Only permitted when CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_EN (synth macro) is set and if CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_PROGRESS_REG (sticky w1set bit set by Caliptra ROM) are set.

Reviewer 2: Can probably say only permitted when OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS set since this bit can't be set unless CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_EN is set. 

Also CALIPTRA_OCP_LOCK_EN is not a synth macro it is a strap.

**TODO:**
- Add DMA rd_route for KV slot 15; no path to read other KV slots.
  - Destination address should not be programmable, but will be derived from stable input (strap for the SSD controller SFR).

### 11 RAS/Security Hardening
- Flush the DMA FIFO so secrets can’t be leaked over scan chain.
- AES KV interface flush – based on scan/debug mode.
- AES KV write-path – track the requested decode size so HW can determine when to write final result to KV.
- Check key_size input to DMA, error out if > 512b.
- Address potential hang when key_size != key_vault read num DW from DMA.
  - When reading from KV, if key_size is smaller than KV entry, drop extra data on the floor (don’t push to FIFO)
- KV filtering rules.

> - Assertion ensuring LOCK_EN can only be set when caliptra in SS mode.

Reviewer 2: @calebofearth  - did you write this assertion?

- DMA KV read error should result on the first transfer cycle from KV to DMA and DMA will immediately go into DMA_ERROR state without sending an AXI transfer.

**SECURITY CONCERN:** Runtime firmware is able to place any arbitrary data into the KeyVault using the AES datapath.
- Steps:
  - Encrypt arbitrary data using AES engine with FW API.
  - Recover output encrypted data.
  - Trigger decrypt operation with KeyVault write.
  - Provide input data as data_in.
  - Data is decrypted and placed in specified KV slot.
- Mitigations:
  - Disable AES KV write path entirely when not in OCP Lock.
  - In OCP LOCK, force all AES KV writes to slot 23, and only with
    - Harden the KV write en from AES so it can’t be modified mid-transfer only for OCP_LOCK_IN_PROGRESS,
    - DOE output can NEVER go to KV23,
    - AES should use the clear signal (from the reg clear trigger request) to clobber buffered KV write context,
    - Add DMA to parallel op check and fatal error.

> ### ROM and Firmware Guidance

Reviewer 2: 1. Thoughts on FW guidence being in integration spec?
2. Should we mention what ROM should do on a warm reset? It should be obvious given the resets the KV and OCP_IN_PROGRESS are assigned to, but might be useful? Thoughts?

Reviewer: added by Emre's recent updates

* 4B scratchpad registers that are lockable but cleared on warm reset (10 registers)
* 4B scratchpad registers that are cleared on warm reset (8 registers)

## OCP LOCK Hardware Architecture

### Overview
The following hardware and ROM/FW enhancements support the OCP L.O.C.K. (a.k.a. **OCP LOCK**) flows defined for SSD applications. The specification is available here:  
[OCP LOCK Spec](https://chipsalliance.github.io/Caliptra/ocp-lock/specification/HEAD)

---

### Additional Registers, Straps, and Macros for OCP LOCK

- **`SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS`**  
  A status/control bit used to enforce the new KeyVault (KV) rules required by OCP LOCK. See the dedicated section below for details on the behaviors it enables.

- **`ss_ocp_lock_en`** (constant-value input strap) with a corresponding bit in **`CPTRA_HW_CONFIG`** register named **`OCP_LOCK_MODE_en`**:
  - Enables Caliptra ROM to perform OCP LOCK operations (e.g., using DOE for HEK de-obfuscation).
  - Allows the ROM to set `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS`.
  - `ss_ocp_lock_en` is a strap pin and **must be driven with a constant value by the integrator**.

>   - `CPTRA_HW_CONFIG` register samples this strap and store its value in `OCP_LOCK_MODE_en` bit

Reviewer: add that the en bit isn't reflected to CPTRA_HW_CONFIG unless CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM is defined

---

### KeyVault Access Rules & Filtering (when `LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` is set)

- **KV23 (MEK destination)**: **write-restricted to AES only**.
- **KV22 (HEK)**: **locked for writes until warm reset** (ROM requirement).
- **KV16 (MDK)**: **locked for writes until warm reset** (ROM requirement).
- If OCP LOCK mode is enabled:
  - **KV23 must not be used** as input to other crypto operations—**only** as a **Key Release** source.
  - **AES-ECB decrypt** with **key = KV16** **must** have **dest = KV23**; otherwise the destination is **FW**.  
    *Rationale:* Prevents malicious FW from writing known values into other KV slots via AES.
- **Additional KV behaviors**
  - On write, HW validates that the **destination** is legal for the **source/read**.
  - **No parallel crypto operations** with KV access. KV does not track this; Caliptra enforces via additional HW logic and signals violations via **`HW_ERROR`** at caliptra top level design.

---

### HEK Seed De‑obfuscation

- Executed by **Caliptra ROM** using DOE.
- **Path:** Ratchet Fuse Register (**obfuscated HEK seed**) → **DOE** (with `OBF_KEY`) → **KV slot 22** (de-obfuscated seed).

> - **KV22** is **locked for use immediately after** it is consumed to derive **HEK**.

Reviewer: Also specify that ROM shall lock for writes - as written, this implies HW locks it

- Allowed **only** when `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` (sticky **W1SET**) is set by Caliptra ROM.
- Destination and size are defined by the straps:
  - `strap_ss_key_release_base_addr`
  - `strap_ss_key_release_key_size`

---

### Additional Security Hardening Specific to OCP LOCK Enhancements

**Scan/Debug Protections**
- Flush **DMA FIFOs** to prevent leakage of secrets via scan chain.
- Flush **AES ↔ KV** interface.

**AES/KV/DMA Robustness**
- **AES → KV write path:** Track requested **decode size** so HW can determine when to commit the final result to KV.
- Validate **DMA `key_size`**; **error** if `key_size > 512b`.
- Avoid hangs when **`key_size` != KV read DWORD count**:
  - On KV reads, if `key_size` is **smaller** than the KV entry, **drop extra data** (do not push to FIFO).
- **DMA KV read error**: Must be raised on the **first transfer cycle** from KV to DMA; DMA transitions immediately to **`DMA_ERROR`** without issuing an AXI transfer.
- **KV write enable sourced from AES** (during OCP LOCK) so it **cannot** be modified mid-transfer.
- **Enable AES ↔ KV write path** only if `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` is set.

---

> ### Caliptra ROM & Firmware Guidance

Reviewer: Should be in Integration Spec.

* 4B scratchpad registers that are lockable but cleared on warm reset (10 registers)
* 4B scratchpad registers that are cleared on warm reset (8 registers)

## OCP LOCK Hardware Architecture

### Overview
The following hardware and ROM/FW enhancements support the OCP L.O.C.K. (a.k.a. **OCP LOCK**) flows defined for SSD applications. The specification is available here:  
[OCP LOCK Spec](https://chipsalliance.github.io/Caliptra/ocp-lock/specification/HEAD)

---

### Additional Registers, Straps, and Macros for OCP LOCK

- **`SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS`**  

>   A status/control bit used to enforce the new KeyVault (KV) rules required by OCP LOCK. See the dedicated section below for details on the behaviors it enables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A status/control bit used to enforce the new KeyVault (KV) rules required by OCP LOCK. Write-1-to-set, meaning that once-enabled, OCP LOCK functionality will persist until the register is cleared by a cold reset. See the dedicated section below for details on the behaviors this register enables.
```

- **`ss_ocp_lock_en`** (constant-value input strap) with a corresponding bit in **`CPTRA_HW_CONFIG`** register named **`OCP_LOCK_MODE_en`**:
  - Enables Caliptra ROM to perform OCP LOCK operations (e.g., using DOE for HEK de-obfuscation).
  - Allows the ROM to set `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS`.
  - `ss_ocp_lock_en` is a strap pin and **must be driven with a constant value by the integrator**.
  - `CPTRA_HW_CONFIG` register samples this strap and store its value in `OCP_LOCK_MODE_en` bit

>   - This bit isn't reflected to CPTRA_HW_CONFIG unless CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM is defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This bit is only reflected in CPTRA_HW_CONFIG if CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM is defined
```

- **HEK seed fuse register**  
  Holds the **obfuscated HEK seed** that is later de-obfuscated by DOE.

> - **MEK address and size straps**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Key release address and size straps**  
```

Reviewer 2: I feel like we should mention MEK here since that’s the intended use of KV23 and the strap.

  Writable until `FUSE_WR_DONE`, then locked (same as other straps).

>   - **Address strap** (`strap_ss_key_release_base_addr`): full destination address for MEK. Firmware can derive the SFR base from this value as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Address strap** (`strap_ss_key_release_base_addr`): full destination address for key release; in OCP LOCK this is the destination for the MEK to be written. Firmware can derive the SFR base from this value as needed.
```

>   - **Size strap** (`strap_ss_key_release_key_size`): byte-count (DWORD count preferred by HW) of the MEK to program to the destination address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Size strap** (`strap_ss_key_release_key_size`): byte-count (dword-aligned count is required by HW) of the key to program to the destination address via the key release operation. Strap input values are forced to a dword value by hardware. If control firmware updates this value (prior to FUSE_WR_DONE being set), it must use a dword-aligned value.
```

Refer to the [Caliptra Integration Spec](https://github.com/chipsalliance/caliptra-rtl/blob/main/docs/CaliptraIntegrationSpecification.md) for more details about macros and strap pins.

---

### `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` Register Bit

**When/How it is set**

> - Set by **Caliptra ROM** after performing OCP LOCK-related derivations (HEK, MDK, EPK, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set by **Caliptra ROM** after performing OCP LOCK-related derivations (HEK, MDK, etc.).
```

> - Can be set **iff** (`ss_ocp_lock_en` **AND** `CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM`) are asserted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Can be set **iff** (`ss_ocp_lock_en` is set to 1 **AND** `CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM` is defined).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Once set, a value of 1 persists until the register is cleared by cold reset.
 
```

**Enforcements/Effects**
- Reserves **KeyVault slots 0–15** for *standard* use-cases.

> - Reserves **KeyVault slots 16–23** for *OCP LOCK* use-cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reserves **KeyVault slots 16–23** for *OCP LOCK* use-cases.
  - Key Vault slot 16 (KV16) is reserved for holding the MDK
  - Key Vault slot 23 (KV23) is reserved for holding the MEK
```

> - Blocks interactions between *standard* slots and *LOCK* slots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Blocks interactions between *standard* slots and *LOCK* slots. This means that any crypto operation that uses a Key Vault input value (e.g. for Key, Block, Seed inputs) may not write the output to a Key Vault from a different region. E.g., When `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` is set, HMAC may not perform an operation that uses Key Vault slot 8 as BLOCK input and writes the output TAG to Key Vault slot 17.
```

> - Enables **Key Release via DMA**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enables **Key Release via AXI DMA**.
```

> - Enables **AES crypto engine writes to KV slot 23**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enables **AES crypto engine writes to Key Vault, which must use Key Vault slot 23**.
```

> **Note:** If `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` is `1`, it also implies `ss_ocp_lock_en` and `CALIPTRA_MODE_SUBSYSTEM` are also `1`.

---

### AES Write Path

- **MEK** is the final OCP LOCK key. It is **decrypted and stored in KV23**. After decryption, MEK may be transferred to its destination **via DMA**.
- OCP LOCK requires both the **AES write path** and a **DMA path** to the MEK destination.

> - **Hardware enforcement:** MEK is written to **KV slot 23**. HW recognizes the MEK generation request if there is an **AES-ECB decrypt** operation with **KV slot 16 (MDK)** as the AES-ECB key and routes the result accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hardware enforcement:** MEK is written to **Key Vault slot 23**. Hardware recognizes the MEK generation request if there is an **AES-ECB decrypt** operation with **Key Vault slot 16 (MDK)** as the AES-ECB key and routes the result accordingly. Any Key Vault write operation requested for the AES output that does not meet these requirements results in a Key Vault write failure status.
```

---

### KeyVault Access Rules & Filtering (when `LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` is set)

- **KV23 (MEK destination)**: **write-restricted to AES only**.
- **KV22 (HEK)**: **locked for writes until warm reset** (ROM requirement).
- **KV16 (MDK)**: **locked for writes until warm reset** (ROM requirement).
- If OCP LOCK mode is enabled:
  - **KV23 must not be used** as input to other crypto operations—**only** as a **Key Release** source.
  - **AES-ECB decrypt** with **key = KV16** **must** have **dest = KV23**; otherwise the destination is **FW**.  
    *Rationale:* Prevents malicious FW from writing known values into other KV slots via AES.
- **Additional KV behaviors**

>   - On write, HW validates that the **destination** is legal for the **source/read**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - On write, hardware validates that the **destination** is legal for the **source/read**.
```

>   - **No parallel crypto operations** with KV access. KV does not track this; Caliptra enforces via additional HW logic and signals violations via **`HW_ERROR`** at caliptra top level design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **No parallel crypto operations** permitted for cryptographic blocks with access to Key Vault. KV does not track this; Caliptra enforces this rule by evaluating each block's busy status indicator and signaling violations through the [CPTRA_HW_ERROR_FATAL](https://chipsalliance.github.io/caliptra-rtl/main/internal-regs/?p=clp.soc_ifc_reg.CPTRA_HW_ERROR_FATAL) register and corresponding interrupt at Caliptra top level design.
```

---

### HEK Seed De‑obfuscation

> - Executed by **Caliptra ROM** using DOE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Executed by **Caliptra ROM**. The DOE supports a HEK deobfuscation command that may be executed only once during a boot cycle. If Caliptra ROM does not run this flow to produce the HEK seed, it should run the flow with a dummy Key Vault slot to lock against future erroneous uses.
```

> - **Path:** Ratchet Fuse Register (**obfuscated HEK seed**) → **DOE** (with `OBF_KEY`) → **KV slot 22** (de-obfuscated seed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hardware-supported HEK seed Deobfuscation Path:** Ratchet Fuse Register (**obfuscated HEK seed**) → **DOE** (with `OBF_KEY`) → **KV slot 22** (de-obfuscated seed).
```

- **KV22** is **locked for writes immediately after** it is consumed to derive **HEK**. Note that Caliptra ROM the one needs to lock it for writes.

---

### Key Release

> Hardware path allowing **KV23 (MEK)** to be written to the SoC via the **DMA block**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Caliptra's AXI DMA supports a hardware path to write **KV23 (MEK)** to the SoC via the AXI manager interface. The following rules constrain this operation:
```

- Allowed **only** when `SS_OCP_LOCK_CTRL.LOCK_IN_PROGRESS` (sticky **W1SET**) is set by Caliptra ROM.

> - Destination and size are defined by the straps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Destination and size must match the values from the straps:
```

  - `strap_ss_key_release_base_addr`
  - `strap_ss_key_release_key_size`

---

### Additional Security Hardening Specific to OCP LOCK Enhancements

**Scan/Debug Protections**
- Flush **DMA FIFOs** to prevent leakage of secrets via scan chain.
- Flush **AES ↔ KV** interface.

**AES/KV/DMA Robustness**
- **AES → KV write path:** The key can't be written to KeyVault unless key_size bytes are decrypted by AES.
- Validate **DMA `key_size`**; **error** if `key_size > 512b`.
- Avoid hangs when **`key_size` != KV read DWORD count**:
  - On KV reads, if `key_size` is **smaller** than the KV entry, **drop extra data** (do not push to FIFO).

> - **DMA KV read error**: Must be raised on the **first transfer cycle** from KV to DMA; DMA transitions immediately to **`DMA_ERROR`** without issuing an AXI transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DMA KV read error**: Raised on the **first transfer cycle** from KV to DMA; DMA transitions immediately to **`DMA_ERROR`** without issuing an AXI transfer.
```
